If you have an old T-shirt lying around, you can easily upcycle it into a simple and eco-friendly tote bag—no sewing required. 
Start by laying the shirt flat and smoothing out any wrinkles. 
Cut off the sleeves, following the seam or slightly inside it, to create the handles. 
Then, cut a wide U-shape around the neckline to form the opening of your tote. 
Decide how deep you want the bag to be, and if necessary, trim off some length from the bottom.
Next, create a fringe along the bottom edge by cutting vertical slits about 3 to 4 inches long and roughly an inch apart. 
You’ll end up with a row of strips from both the front and back layers of the shirt.
Tie each front strip to its matching back strip in a tight double knot. 
For a more secure base, you can tie the strips diagonally—each front strip to the back strip beside it—to help close any gaps between knots. 
If you'd rather sew for added durability, flip the shirt inside out and sew a straight line across the bottom instead of tying the fringe. 
You can also hem the neckline and armholes for a cleaner finish. 
Feel free to personalize your tote with fabric paint, iron-on patches, or even add a pocket using fabric scraps. It's a fun and sustainable way to give an old shirt new life.
To reuse a mini piece a fabric, use these ideas:
Sew a pin cushion
Apply it in an appliqué embroidery
Use it in a patchwork
Serge it and use it as a bookmark
Create a bag charm
Use it as a patch to repair a hole in clothes or sheets for example
Serge it and use it as a reusable cotton pad
Create a key fob
Sew a mini t-shirt for a doll
Turn it into a pocket for a garment
Create a skirt for a doll
Sew a mini pillow for a doll
Embroider it and turn it into a badge
Create a decoration for a Christmas tree
Sew a pouch for earphones
Make a covered button
Sew a scrunchie
Turn it into a coaster
Sew a mug rug
Make a fabric brooch
Sew a reusable decorative bow
Make a covered hair clip
Sew a mini face mask for a doll
To reuse small sized pieces of fabric, use these ideas:
Sew a purse
Create a t-shirt for a baby
Sew a diaper for a doll
Make a dress for a doll
Sew a pouch
Turn it into a pen holder
Create a pencil case
Make a glass case
Turn it into a sleep mask
Sew a tiny tote bag for a doll
Make a headband
Create a mini doll
Turn it into a post card
Sew a case for picnic cutlery
Make a handkerchief case
Turn it into a label for gift wrap
Use it as a kitchen wipe
Sew a pin book
Turn it into a hoop art
Sew cute puppets
Turn it into a needle organizer
Sew a tooth fairy pillow
Turn it into a cloth pad
Make fabric vegetables
Create a carnival mask
To reuse a medium piece of fabric, use these ideas:
Sew a napkin
Turn it into a hand towel
Make a first aid kit
Use is as a stabilizer for embroidery
Use it to test new embroidery designs
Sew a baby bib
Create a made to measure notebook cover
Make a washcloth
Sew a heating pad
Turn it into a custom made sleeping bag for a doll
Sew a panty
Create a pouch for headphones
Make a Easter basket
Create a reusable Christmas Wreath
Turn it into party decorations
Make a pot holder
Sew a gift envelope
Make cozy slippers
Create a belt bag
Sew a fabric folder
Turn it into a tic-tac-toe bag
Make a graphic tablet case
Sew a tablet sleeve
Create a lunch bag
Turn it into gloves
Sew a hooded towel for a baby
To recycle a large piece of clothing and fabric:
Sew a pillow case
Turn it into a cover for furniture
Create a halloween bag
Use it as a baby swaddle
Make a kitchen towel
Serge it and use it as a furoshiki
Make a shoe bag
Create a vanity case
Sew an apron
Make a sustainable Christmas tree
Turn it into a quilt
Sew a customized tote bag
Make a skirt
Turn it into an art bag
Create a quiet book
Sew a laundry bag
Make a reusable advent calendar
Turn it into a vinyl record bag
Sew a quilted laptop case
Create a backpack
Use it as a toile for a sewing pattern
Sew a cover for your sewing machine
Make an iron table cover
Create a work vest
Turn it into a bike bag
Sew a painter’s smock
If you have an old T-shirt lying around, you can easily upcycle it into a simple and eco-friendly tote bag—no sewing required. 
Start by laying the shirt flat and smoothing out any wrinkles. 
Cut off the sleeves, following the seam or slightly inside it, to create the handles. 
Then, cut a wide U-shape around the neckline to form the opening of your tote. 
Decide how deep you want the bag to be, and if necessary, trim off some length from the bottom.
Next, create a fringe along the bottom edge by cutting vertical slits about 3 to 4 inches long and roughly an inch apart. 
You’ll end up with a row of strips from both the front and back layers of the shirt.
Tie each front strip to its matching back strip in a tight double knot. 
For a more secure base, you can tie the strips diagonally—each front strip to the back strip beside it—to help close any gaps between knots. 
If you'd rather sew for added durability, flip the shirt inside out and sew a straight line across the bottom instead of tying the fringe. 
You can also hem the neckline and armholes for a cleaner finish. 
Feel free to personalize your tote with fabric paint, iron-on patches, or even add a pocket using fabric scraps. It's a fun and sustainable way to give an old shirt new life.
I tend to clean out my clothes closet after Christmas each year. Over the years I have bought a lot of clothing, and over time have discovered it’s much easier to buy clothing than to part with it. Clothes will get worn for a season or two and then they pass into closet limbo.  
I hang onto these garments for camping, gardening, or for painting clothes.  And the nice outfits?  Maybe I’ll fit into that favourite 1990’s era Sears blue leopard print dress again sometime… 
But on close inspection of my closet and lifestyle, do I really need to keep dresses that don’t fit, bagged out sleep T-shirts and pairs of painting pants?  
And we have’t gone camping for about 6 years now.
Then there are the clothes I thought I’d like, but for some reason they were a disappointment. 
They don’t get worn except to try them on and they are quickly vetoed for some other more acceptable garment. 
About 12% of our closets have what’s called ‘inactive’ clothing. 
That’s according to a study by sociologist Sophie Woodward at the University of Manchester.
Used clothing sent to landfills or donated
There are literally tons of garments and other textiles being sent to landfill each year, about 37 kg (81lbs) on average per person.  
Sadly, I have to agree with these statistics, having lugged bags of clothes to the used shop on a yearly basis.
There are things in my closet I have not worn in decades, and in my once-a-year purge, I do my best to cull ‘the collection’. Donation trips to the used clothing shops have me very familiar with the Goodwill, Salvation Army and St. Vincent de Paul stores in my area. 
There are always lots of shoppers in these stores which proves that there is demand.
Upcycle clothing and repurpose into new clothes and accessories
Lately, I’ve been creating my own thoughtful wardrobe – by sewing it.  Sometimes I start with new fabrics and a pattern from what we offer for sale at the ABQ Sewing Studio.  We carry both ABQ patterns for bags, quilts, and home décor and patterns from other designers, including clothing.
But there’s another way to improve your wardrobe and your sewing skills, and that’s to buy used clothing or repurpose what you already have in your closet. 
Lately, I’ve been visiting to search the racks for items that I might turn into new-looking modern wear and accessories. I like to sew and experiment while sewing, and buying used allows me to exercise my sewing brain in an inexpensive and more responsible way. 
Clothing repurposing is a great way to stretch your creativity
When I want to get really creative I repurpose clothes and make whatever comes to mind.  It’s amazing how much you learn deconstructing apparel and reconstructing into something that looks brand new and fashion forward.  
My goal is to impress myself, not look like I just mended Gramma’s old housecoat and am wearing it for outerwear now!  
We offer a class called Upcycling Green Style that shows you how to upcycle clothing
Over at the ABQ Sewing Studio we teach others to sew clothing, bags, and home decor, in addition to quilts. That’s why we are offering a class called Upcycling Green Style.  We take a quick trip on the day of the class to pick up a few items from the local Goodwill shop and then create some new wear with them back at the studio. Both Irene Mischkinis and I (Brenda Miller) are there to help you find used clothing suitable for upcycling to create your own fashionable wear.  Check our classes schedule to find the next class.
Examples of upcycled clothing: Men’s jacket transformed into a bag
I thought this men’s large-sized jacket would make a nice button-front skirt but it was too short for the pattern pieces – so I made a bag. 
In an example of how to upcycle clothing, this men's jacket was repurposed into a purse.
Here’s the finished bag, front and back, notice the cuffs that form part of the back pocket.
Men’s shirt becomes a women’s tank top
I had a box of men’s shirts donated at the Studio and found this beauty inside.  This Kwik Sew pattern for a racer-back tank top is what I used to cut with.
There was some piecing necessary to get the width right, but with the stripe pattern it’s invisible so no one will be the wiser.  I used the button front and hemline of the shirt, added pockets and the racer back and voila!  
There was very little left over in the way of scrap fabric at the end of these two projects.
Shopping tips
Here are some tips I’d like to share that will help when you do your green shopping:
If you have a project in mind it’s good to have a few sewing patterns to refer to, such as a skirt, t-shirt , or shirt pattern. 
If you are new to sewing you should start by finding a garment that is a reasonable fit. Using that garment change things up with a different hemline, a change to the sleeves or collar, different buttons or by adding pockets or a frill. Embellish your new look any way you like
Other items to consider if you have a bit more sewing experience are bags, hats and other accessories for the home or yourself.
It’s better to use clothing made with natural fabrics. You’ll have to check the labels for this.
Naturally you would not pick anything that is too worn to be useful.
Find things in the colours you prefer.
Buy oversized clothing.  It’s easier to cut the right sized pieces to make your new garment if you work with a pattern to remodel.  Smaller garments will work for accessories and kids clothes in most cases. 
Don’t go shopping with a preconceived idea of what you want to make.  What you find will determine what you make. 
Use the existing elements that have already been sewn into the used garment in your new garment. 
Try combining garments to make your new look.  You’ll want to buy fabrics that work together and can be laundered in the same way. 
Pre-wash whenever possible although you can wash later. 
Before buying look through your own closet to see what you can re-purpose. Ditto if you are a quilter.  Some of your excess fabric would make a great lining or trim.
Take as much care sewing your ‘new to you’ garment as you would using new fabric.
Practice makes perfect. You may want to ‘tweak’ your idea by making it again. Nobody is good at something with just a try or two.
Enjoy the creativity of the process and learn to go with the flow!
Tools and supplies used to upcycle clothing
When doing any sewing project it’s important to have the right tools to do the work.  You won’t use all of these items for each project but this will give you an overview.
Supplies Required:
A sewing machine in working order.  It should have some type of edge finishing stitch like zig-zag.
All the machine’s sewing feet -zipper foot, presser foot, blind hem foot, walking foot etc.
A serger if you have one
A supply of threads to match
Good quality scissors for cutting fabric
Small sharp scissors for cutting threads
Rotary cutting mat, rulers and cutting tools
A fine-tip seam ripper 
A French Curve
Paper you can use to draft a pattern 
A Sharpie Marker for drafting your pattern
Iron and ironing board
Pins and hand sewing needle
Point turner
A selection of buttons, snaps, hook and eyes, zippers etc.
I hope you’ve started to think about how you can upcycle clothing instead of always buying new. 
Upcycled Clothes into New Clothes
Upcycling old clothing into entirely new garments is a creative and sustainable way to refresh your wardrobe. Whether you're turning a t-shirt into a dress or altering the neckline or sleeves for a modern twist, the possibilities are endless. These projects are a great way to create one-of-a-kind clothing that reflects your personal style and reduces waste.
Other Items to Upcycle Clothes Into
Old clothes don't just have to become new clothes — they can become entirely new items! From cozy quilts made from worn-out shirts to soft plush toys and wall art, there are so many ways to give fabric a second life. Quilting, in particular, is a favorite upcycling method because it's both sentimental and sustainable.
Visible Mending
Visible mending is a practical and creative way to repair small holes or rips, especially in kids' clothes that see heavy use. It not only extends the life of the garment but also adds unique character and flair, turning flaws into features. It's a great way to teach kids about sustainability while making their clothes look cooler than ever.
Men’s Shirt into Fitted Blouse
Men’s shirts are an upcycler’s dream due to their generous amount of fabric. With some time and sewing skills, you can transform one into a cute, fitted blouse. This project is perfect if you’re looking for a dramatic before-and-after transformation.
Upcycled Girls T-shirt Dress
Using several coordinating old t-shirts, you can create an adorable and unique dress for a little girl. This is a fun way to use clothing that may have stains or wear in some spots but still has plenty of good material left.
How to Sew a T-Shirt Pocket
Adding a pocket to a t-shirt or any piece of clothing is a beginner-friendly sewing project. Especially helpful for women's clothing that often lacks functional pockets, this tutorial teaches you how to draft and sew a pocket with ease.
Upcycle Thrifted Tops
Thrifted tops can be easily transformed into stylish new pieces like crop tops. Tracy Garcia's YouTube tutorial walks you through how to turn an ordinary secondhand shirt into something trendy and fresh with just a few changes.
Turn a Maxi Dress into a Skirt
A maxi dress that's too large or rarely worn can be quickly converted into a skirt by simply adding a waistband. This project leaves the length intact and is a great way to keep enjoying a garment you already own.
How To Take In The Bust on a Dress or Top
Finding clothes that fit just right in the bust can be a challenge. This tutorial teaches you how to alter that specific area to achieve a better fit, making your favorite dress or top even more flattering and wearable.
How to Convert a Skirt into Shorts
Using a well-fitting pair of shorts as a guide, you can turn a skirt into shorts with ease. This upcycle is especially great for kids' clothes and can be adapted for various types of garments using the same method.
Unicorn Jean Jackets with Cricut
A Cricut machine offers endless possibilities for upcycling. This beginner tutorial shows you how to use it to give old clothing — like jean jackets — a fun and colorful makeover. A great way to get started with fabric embellishments!
Dress Shirt to Infinity Scarf
If you have a shirt with a pattern you love but a fit you don’t, consider turning it into a scarf. With just some straight cuts and simple sewing, you can repurpose the fabric into a fashionable infinity scarf you’ll actually wear.
Old T-shirt Into The Perfect Head Wrap
Soft and stretchy t-shirt fabric makes the perfect material for head wraps. These are especially appreciated by those going through chemotherapy or those with curly hair, thanks to the gentle texture and moisture-retaining properties of the fabric.